Thank you very much, everyone. Thank you very much again for participating and welcome everyone.
Welcome again. And now we have just started doing a retreat together, which is a little wonderful.
A little bit inspiring and helping to each other. And perhaps I say,
you know, following the footsteps of the greatest teacher, Gautam Shatyamuni, Gautam Masamma,
all the religious masters, which is wonderful. We're really making meaningful life,
taking some good benefit and good result of our very disputable existing on this earth.
So therefore, I thank you all, everyone, for participating and for we're together with this.
Now, again, I'm going to go through the teachings of the Dzogchen pith instructions as I've been
doing.
And so, in this way, always in the teaching set, or in all the masters in teaching set,
again, before we do, we'll receive the teaching, start in the teaching, practice the teaching of
the Buddha Dharma,
and strengthen our motivation. Intention is so important.
And there's so many motivations and intentions, generally, and there's not even numbers there.
But however, the greatest teacher, Buddha Shatyamuni, summarized into three categories,
and also we all know or heard this, and which is good intention, bad intention, and neutral
intentions.
So this time, we're going to completely give way to the negative intention or bad intention,
and then we're going to also activate our good intentions.
And this neutral intention, also even we're going to not keep that neutral intention,
we're going to transform the neutral intention into the positive good intentions.
And so that is really good. The mind is the foundation and the source of both samsara and nirvana.
This time, we're trying to really follow the path of the teaching, or the path truth,
and then we will get realization, the results.
So, the path truth and realization, or the path truth and the sociological truth, is nirvana.
Nirvana also begins with our mind. Similarly, samsara begins with our mind.
And there is also a small subtle point that good mind is the cause of the nirvana.
Bad mind is the cause of samsara. That's what every teaching says.
And as Nagarjuna said, and I kind of use the quotations of Nagarjuna's teachings,
negative emotion is the very fundamental cause of samsara,
and the positive mind is the very, very cause of the nirvana.
So therefore, now we're following the path truth.
And among the path truth, generally, there is always the teaching said,
distant path, short path, very, very short path, speed path.
And distant path, such as the suttara teachings, to the enlightenment,
we're talking to the Buddhahort, not talking to just nirvanas.
We're talking to the enlightened Buddhahort.
Distant path is the suttara teachings.
Mahayana suttara teachings, with you in the teachings said,
if you follow the teachings of the suttara of Mahayana
with the bodhicata and good ethnic and everything,
it will take at least three countless eons to reach the Buddhahort.
Enlightenment, three countless eons.
That also is really the, according to the teaching, what I said,
also the path to a highly culpability practitioner of the suttara Mahayana
will take three countless eons.
Medium culpability practitioner of the Mahayana, suttara Mahayana,
will take seven countless eons.
And the average culpability of the practitioner of the suttara Mahayana,
it will take thirty-two countless eons.
So three countless eons, even considered in the suttara Mahayana,
is quite speed, past.
But this time, according to the linear masters,
divided into three.
Distant path, short path, very short path.
Short distance path is the suttara Mahayana, that takes those many eons.
And the short path is the outer tender teaching,
which will take three lifetimes, five lifetimes, seven lifetimes,
is the dependent outer tender practices to reach enlightenment.
And the quickest path to getting enlightenment is zobchi teachings.
According to zobchi teachings, you will get enlightenment within our single lifetimes.
But we need fuel to reach enlightenment.
One is fuel, is courage, commitment, joyful effort, devotion, both each other.
Those are the fuel and knowledge and wisdom to understand and read teaching, teaching to the heart.
Generally, those fuels, as I use it, F-U-E-L, fuel, that's needed to all the practices.
It's not just only zobchi teachings, but zobchi teachings are so fast, so quick,
because it reveals the direct innate nature of our own, the inherited Buddha, instantly,
and connected to all the natural, our own enlightenment, our own enlightenment of the rakwa,
the southbound awareness, rakwa, ramzom, yihi.
Therefore, have you have devotion, both each other, joyful effort within these lifetimes.
And great masters, such as Chaiti Sanghi also,
and many others, those great masters whom keep up, they reach enlightenment not just this long,
kind of life, this lifetime, but even in the years, twelve years,
the absolute rainbow-boding enlightenment, that is what it is.
But that all start with the motivation.
Motivation is the foundation.
At this time, there we are talking of the activating good motivation,
which is joy, appreciation, and then devotions, and both each other,
and then purely understanding or the realization of the Vedayana teachings.
So those are the needed motivation.
With that motivation, then we follow with these teachings.
And here, we came to this now in Islam.
I think you have all this.
What is this?
One, two, three, four, five, six, six, seven line.
This is six and seven, six line, seven line, and eight line, line,
and then as well as the next one is four, the three goals of the practioners.
All that is we need always.
It's not just once a time we should have that.
This is we are going to maintain during all the time of our practice of this life
until we reach enlightenment.
So that means what?
We always trust in the three jewels.
Our three jewels are impiliable, social reference.
With that trusty, we're going to do not mistake about the result
and the virtuous actions, particularly a devotion to the Lord's teachers,
love and affection to the Samaya brothers and sisters,
the bodhicitta of compassion towards all the mother-sentence beings,
component things are impermanent and should be,
and these are known as the four everlasting worlds of the practioners
and should be regarded as indispensable.
With that intention, with that thought,
and then do this, continue at this practice as it says, as N.T.T. said.
And I will go over these lines again,
but quite little details of each of those forms.
But first, I'm going to summarize entirely teaching the practices
into those three novels.
On the day, I mentioned principal novelties, all the principal novels,
all novels, three novels, the beginning novel, middle novel,
concolating novel that encompass the entire practice of the teaching.
Now, again, we're going to think.
Generally, Buddha teaching, how you learn and absorb to the heart
and make a difference by what I'm teaching.
Studying, contemplating and practicing, those three are how we are studying.
Studying and contemplating is generally studying.
What N.T.T. says, studying is you're studying with the meaning of the words,
meaning of the teachings.
That is so you are really looking, going up and analyzing
or reflecting the teaching of the book.
Contemplating is now, when you contemplate that teaching,
what you've learned, now you contemplate it to your own intelligence,
with your own heart.
That's connected. What the teaching says, how you interpret it,
what all the great masters said, all the great practitioners said about that
and kind of blending in with you so that you will have certainty wisdom.
Certainty wisdom.
What we like to know, what we have to have.
Certainty.
The study of the teaching of the Buddha, well,
make that difference of the meaning of the word, what it says.
But now, the quadruple enemy is explore the deep root of that.
Deep root of the teaching.
That is, again, the greatest teacher, Buddha Chaturman himself said,
you don't have to believe, you should not believe what I said.
You must analyze yourself.
It makes sense or it don't make sense.
Because Buddha teaching is teaching of the way things are, truth.
Truth exactly and where things are on the relative truth,
where things are on the absolute truth.
So this is, truth is not occupied by certain individualism or selected groups.
Truth is pervasive.
As sunshine, as sky, sky or sunshine,
it's not just a prayer only, and only then called the prayed evils
of some certain selected group, ghettos.
Everyone has ego.
So therefore, the exploration of the truth is so important.
Because the teaching is true, it's natural.
So once you have done this, so that,
the quadruple enemy, when you get the meaning,
when you've really got some degree of meaning,
now you start to practice.
That is known as the other great masters, other great practitioners.
And the teachings said, other great masters said,
the teachers said, the books said, or Buddha teachings said,
now I understand, to me, it's really in my sense,
and now I'm going to practice.
That means what?
We are going to practice with all the doubt and hesitations,
the skeptics.
Practice with, practice with confidence,
practice with joy, practice with appreciation,
practice with thankful gratitude.
We're going to practice because practice with reality,
each of us exploring our own beauty of nature,
our own beauty.
Our own beauty that will defeat all the troubles of the samsaras,
all the difficulties of the samsaras.
We are equipping ourselves strong and very powerful
and strength to defeat all the hindrance,
troubles, difficulties, misfortunes, anxiety, depression.
Whether it is a mental problem,
whether it is a psychological problem,
whatever we're going to really defeat,
defeat that into the emptiness.
When we defeat it, even there's no trace that we find.
That's what we're going to do.
But that's what we're going to do by recognizing the truth,
seeing the truth exactly as it is.
And therefore, we're going to do that with confidence,
with the diligence, with the determinations.
We're going to do this, not just only that for ourselves,
we're going to do that for all the beings with our body together.
So therefore, this contemplation, that is so important,
that will lead to the practice.
So therefore, when it comes to the practices,
practice, the Buddha teaching is as I said the other day,
I mean, you know, we all know, it's not just I said
and I'm saying this thing, thing, I heard this to you,
I read this in the books.
Buddha told over 45 years teachings,
and those teachings are summarized into 84,000.
That teaching is also in the, in the teachings here,
the great master, 12 excellent teachings.
That 12 excellent teachings can be summarized
into three basket teachings, or three pedaka teachings.
And so that three pedaka teachings, now what do we have to do?
There is three particular pedaka teachings
you're studying and contemplate.
Now we have to practice.
For that practice, not just only on the intellectual state,
you have to absorb that into the heart and the practice as I said,
we have to practice.
When we practice this, what that really actually means,
we have to discipline our mind.
Our speech, our vodice activity.
And how to do that?
According teaching, actually, we like to discipline our self.
That means we like to make more gentle, more peaceful,
more simple one, then we have to start with the mind.
That is the practice way to do.
Mind, that is. When the mind is become more gentle, peaceful, simple,
naturally it will bring gentle, peaceful of the verbal
and as well as verbal activity, physical activities.
So therefore, we have to do this.
This will go to the mind, which is a source, which is root.
And that is then, when you come to the practice,
and that I said, great master, un kimba, also highlight them.
It's not just un kimba, but everyone teaching said,
but highlight by the great master, un kimba.
And that is then three novel, at least, or three novels.
Beginner novel, middle novel, and concluding novels.
Why it means, in the debate, it's called dhambasan, dhamba, dhambasan.
Dhamba means novel, or supreme novel.
Why it is novel?
As I said, the Buddha gave all those teachings
in order to discover our inner nature, of the enlightenment, all that.
And those all teachings are summarized into these three groups.
So that means, according to this one,
this is supreme among all the teachings, these three.
Or these are the novelties, most noble ones, of all the teachings.
So that, in a way, we capture the essence of the entire teaching
of the Buddha Chakra meaning into these three simple frames,
beginning novel, middle novel, and concluding novels.
Therefore, it is novel.
Since the novel, it will make us novel, novelty.
It will bring the final novelties.
It is novel. It is.
And now, what are those novels? In the teaching set, what is it?
First novel is intention.
Sentential with both each other.
And the second novel is then no grasping or clinging.
Meditation without clingings.
Third novelity or novel is inspiration and dedication.
And that encompasses entirely practices.
Whether to reach enlightenment or to discover the ultimate novel.
Novel.
First novel, also what is in the teaching set,
first novel is a skillful means.
Skillful means novel of both each other or intention with both each other.
Skillful means that means the market.
When you have this novelty of both intention of both each other,
that is a skillful means.
It will transform the second and third all the perfect.
So it is really the foundation.
It is a foundation.
It is vital structures of the practices.
When we practice, intention.
That is...
You're my subject, I think.
Sentient.
Sentient is like skillful means.
Skillful means is a matter of that intention.
And second, how is named?
Named.
Named...
The practice will never going to damage it.
Cause or damage it spoils.
By the method of the non-grasping meditation and practices.
So this, if we practice the meditation without grasping, clinging,
too much, or clinging,
that practice, that merituring, merit will last forever.
Not just it lasts forever, it will multiply.
It will increase.
Therefore, second is so important.
It is holding together all the practice right as it should be.
Should be needed.
Third one, the final one.
What is the final one? The final novel is aspiration and dedication.
One in the teaching said that the last one, aspiration and dedication,
will increase multiplying the merit all the time.
Even we are not practicing. Even we are not meditating.
But when we do the practices, when we do the meditation,
at the end we do the good aspiration and good dedication,
that will multiply the merit even if we are not practicing.
Therefore, it is known as the multipliers.
It will bring surplus and continuous surplus of the very, very choice.
So therefore, these three are the novels in order to reach our self,
to save all living beings in life.
So that is really what I said. Now I said those three.
Now I go back to the beginning.
The beginning of the novel is the intention with both each other.
So that means intention with both each other.
What is the intention? Joy, appreciation, and both each other in devotion.
Those are the intentions. Those are the intentions.
Those are the foundations of our practices.
That's how we begin. Mostly joy and appreciation. Joy of our lives. Joy of our situations.
Joy of that we are as beautiful human beings.
Joy of all the situations and circumstances that we are surrounded.
Even though we are in samsara, but we have the window of light, all of us.
When we compare to the many beings who are going through all the difficulties,
challenge one after another, endless, constantly.
Don't mention the three lower realms, but even these women's names, in this women's world,
how many people are going troubled and difficult.
But to compare with that, what we are and how they are going,
we have much more to be celebrated of our situation, circumstances.
If it is true or not, you reflect. Really.
Even your own tone, even though you own your places, you can see the examples where that happened.
Even the richest country in the world, highly developed country in the world,
there are still so many things going on.
We can be one of those to you, but we are not. Many of us are still so good.
Generally in the Buddha's teaching and all the great masters teaching,
being as human beings is much more better, even going through all the difficult challenges,
much more better and beautiful than the three lower realms.
You cannot really compare with situation and circumstances what going through in those three lower
realms.
Why I am going to bring the three lower realms with human realms?
According to Buddhism, you all know, I am talking Buddhism.
According to Buddhism, the three lower realms are not just owned by select groups.
It is all directed by our karma, our actions and cause and effects.
But we are not in three lower realms, so that means we had good karma.
That means we did something good in the past, even though we don't see the past.
But this now tells, our situation tells the past being quite good.
For example, if I have the delicious apple right in front of me, apple.
Or if I have apple, if I add this apple, apple, and see that apple is so delicious, choose.
I can tell this apple, even I don't know where it grows, where it bored them,
but that wherever it is growing, it must be good soil, good condition.
That's why I have this delicious apple.
Apple even maybe is not good looking apple, but it is delicious and very good.
That tells me something.
Even the good looking apple I have here right in front of me,
but if I eat, it's not that good. It's not sweet.
Can't let it sour or can't strain the flavors.
That tells, even though I don't see that way it grows,
that soil, that condition, whatever, it's not that good.
I can tell, that is inevitable deductions of the valid cognitions.
For that reason, what the gracious teacher, Buddha Shatami said,
"Read, present your deductive past.
Present well the doubt or inference of the past
and read your action of now and project the futures."
That's what really a very practical statement in practical teaching is true.
Present, our situation, our circumstance is the foundation.
It is a code and conditions for our destinations.
Therefore, being as good or smart human beings,
we have every right to do good things,
which reflect for ourselves good all the way to the future
and also is good for the other beings.
Because being as Buddhism practitioners,
what the gracious teacher Buddha said,
"And help to the others, help to yourself, and fulfill your purpose."
Two purposes.
Therefore, being as a citizen of the human beings or the world,
we have every reason to really try to do good things.
And which is dharma, which is practice, which is so special?
It is good for you, good for the others, good for us,
in which we should do that.
So therefore, this good intention is really the foundation.
For that reason, as I'm talking now, bring more joy and appreciation,
more grateful, more thankful.
Many times, our mind is always looking outside.
And not just outside, always looking far distant.
We miss always our near, near or close ones, close.
We don't kind of look, we're always with expectations,
with hopes, looking some kind far and far.
And then we are missing the point.
We're losing our ground of feet.
We're looking all the time.
We have to be practical.
Look to far horizons, but look to your own feet,
your own standing.
Make stronger friends.
And when you look around us,
we have so many to be thankful.
We should be really thankful to our families, our friends,
our, all the different situations, circumstances, fellow citizens.
And then bodhicandas always, in the bodhisattva thing,
he said, "Sentin beings or other beings are so important."
Like important guests, as like Buddhas,
all everyone is so important, so kind and so special.
Special in order to reach our self with enlightenment,
in order to become the Buddha.
We have to have others.
Otherwise, how we can practice,
how we can do all those meditation, practice and act,
can't be like become stronger or something.
So there, every level is really a whole.
We should be thankful, grateful.
Grateful, joy and appreciation is the drone of enlightenment.
That enlightenment begins with joy.
Enlightenment begins with, or Buddhahood begins with joy.
Buddhahood begins with appreciation, thankful.
At the same time, courage and commitment.
At the same time, more humble and more simple.
Don't let up, more powerful.
Advance with the creator.
And then, with joy and appreciation.
And bodhicandas.
We all know, we all heard this bodhicandas.
Bodhicandas is a very practical,
entirely Buddha teaching, particularly Mahayana teachers.
Even in the teaching, he said,
bodhicatha makes a difference between
foundation of Buddhism school and Mahayana teachings.
So bodhicatha is really the foundation of the Buddhahood, enlightenment.
And therefore, activating bodhicatha.
And I'm going to talk those a little bit more forward.
We all know, you all heard this bodhicatha so many times.
From so many great masters, and really the books.
But it's always in the Buddha teaching to remember,
recollect, the preparation of the bodhicatha is marvelous.
It's marvelous.
And therefore, trusting in the words of the Buddha teaching,
I will go over the bodhicatha too.
I'm going to go on these meanings.
That is bodhicatha is precious mind.
Mind.
What the great Murphema Samba said,
bodhicatha is a mind of Buddha.
It's the Buddha.
Believe it or not,
the moment we develop the bodhicatha,
that moment we are to the Buddha status.
Buddha.
What bodhicatha has, actually, in the teaching, say,
compassion, loving-kindness, wisdom.
That's three, these three.
Loving-kindness, compassion, wisdom.
This is Buddha mind.
This is enlightened mind.
When we have that with joy and appreciation,
truly enlightenment is shining quite brilliantly
in each of our heart.
That is, it's true, not making up stories.
That is really good.
So bodhicatha is so, so important.
Once we have the bodhicatha strongly,
combine, target with it, then devotions.
Devotions and pain are similar.
As I said, pain and devotion.
Departime, moodiness, pain.
But devotion is really joy, appreciation,
confidence and richness feeling, openness feeling,
that combined the beautiful mental attitude is devotion.
That is the vapor.
Vapor, oh, yeah, vapor. This is warmth, warmth of both each other.
Warmth is just coming out the mist,
the warmth mist of both each other.
That we need to bloom the enlightenment fully.
That most we need.
So this, therefore, what I said,
I'm going to talk bodhicatha more and more of that,
but I'm going, this is what I said.
Today, the foundation, beginning novel.
The foundation novel is joy and bodhicatha and devotees.
These three are really so, so important.
This is not just important, the beginning time,
but this is always we need.
Joy and appreciation, bodhicatha and devotion
during the meditation practices.
If you bring that energy, it will rephrase our meditation.
It will rephrase our practices, practices.
And if we have that also, with this intention,
it will keep our practice always fresh.
It's not going to become boring, boring and tiring.
I have all this, again, I have to do all these kind of things.
I'm never going to.
And we have the joy and appreciation, bodhicatha.
When we did it, we made it.
That's how it will increase all the marriage or marriage.
So therefore, this is really important.
So important.
And therefore, it's called the beginning novel.
Beginning novel.
And that is my talk for today.
Thank very much, again, for participating and for coming.
And thank, okay, now we do the short meditation.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.